******_Dropping_a_Mountain_******
What if a huge mountain---Denali, say---had the bottom inch of its base
disappear? What would happen from the impact of the mountain falling 1 inch?
What about 1 foot? What if the mountain's base were raised to the present
height of the summit, and then the whole thing were allowed to drop to the
earth?
John-Clark Levin
The one-inch gap would take about 70 milliseconds to close. Don't stick your
hand in.
[/imgs/a/57/mountain_hand.png]
The impact could trigger an earthquake. Denali (also known as Mount McKinley)
is a mountain in Alaska that sits just to the south of a major fault line.
[1]Roger A. Hansen, Earthquake_and_Seismic_Monitoring_in_Denali_National_Park,
National Park Service This fault is active,[2]Alaska Earthquake Information
Center, M_7.9_Denali_Fault_earthquake_of_November_3,_2002 and we know that
drilling can trigger earthquakes.[3]Van der elst NJ, Savage HM, Keranen KM,
Abers GA. Enhanced_remote_earthquake_triggering_at_fluid-injection_sites_in_the
midwestern_United_States. Science. 2013;341(6142):164-7. Earthquakes can happen
at any time, so there's always a chance that dropping a mountain any distance
could trigger one. So could kicking a tree. The only way to find out for sure
would be to try it.[4]This article has an awful lot of citations.
Assuming it didn't trigger an earthquake, the impact wouldn't be all that
dramatic. If you were standing on the mountain when it happened, you'd
definitely feel a jolt, but it probably wouldn't even be enough to knock you
down.
[/imgs/a/57/mountain_surf.png]
When the mountain hit the ground, the rock under it would be damaged, but only
a little. The granite base is strong enough to hold up under the tremendous
resting weight of a mountain;[5]Citation: The rock was holding up a mountain
when you got there. the shockwave from dropping it an inch doesn't add too much
pressure on top of that, and the rock would survive with a little minor
cracking.
People nearby would definitely feel the impact, and probably hear it; the sound
would likely resemble the crack of a lightning strike (if you were standing
near the mountain) fading into a long, deep rumble.[6]Citation: A dream I had
once. The vibration would be equivalent to that of a 3.5-magnitude earthquake
[7]For more on the specific seismic details, see Stein, Seth, and Michael
Wysession. &quot;Earthquakes.&quot; An Introduction to Seismology, Earthquakes,
and Earth Structure. Malden, MA: Blackwell Pub., 2003. 241. Print.; at worst,
it would knock a few pictures off the wall if you happened to be living next to
the mountain. Frankly, I'd be more worried about debris flying out of the gap.
[8]If your magical mountain-cutter put air in the space where the rock used to
be, you should avoid standing near the crack when it falls. The air will come
jetting out from the closing crack, spraying rocks and dust at speeds
approaching, or even---thanks to some fun heat-related effects---exceeding,
Mach 1.
[/imgs/a/57/mountain_hat.png]
Oh. You again.
Ok.
Dropping from a height of one foot wouldn't be all that different.
[/imgs/a/57/mountain_foot.png]
The mountain would hit the ground at 2.5 m/s, or roughly walking speed. The
shockwave from that impact would be in the range of 50 megapascals of pressure,
[9]You can calculate the peak pressure of the compressive strain wave in the
rock using the Joukowsky equation, which says that the peak pressure of the
compressive wave in a material is (material's density)x(speed at impact)x(the
speed of sound in the material). This equation is is normally used in fluid
mechanics, but it_works_fine_here,_too! which granite can handle without too
much trouble.[10]Bhat HS, Sammis CG, Rosakis AJ. The_Micromechanics_of
Westerley_Granite_at_Large_Compressive_Loads. Pure Appl. Geophys. 2011;168(12):
2181-2198.Â [11]&quot;... for a plane shock wave ... granite will stand a
compressive stress of 3000-4000 MPa elastically before failing.&quot; Persson,
Per-Anders, Roger Holmberg, and Jaimin Lee. Rock_Blasting_and_Explosives
Engineering. Boca Raton, FL: CRC, 1994. 5-6. Print.
[/imgs/a/57/mountain_hat.png]
Ok. Let's jump straight to the end of John-Clark's question:
[/imgs/a/57/mountain_summit.png]
After falling from summit height to base height---about 5 kilometers---the
mountain would be moving at roughly the speed of sound.
The last two impacts were pretty minor. This one wouldn't be. The jolt to the
ground would be as violent as in a magnitude 7 earthquake.[12]In addition,
there's a good chance that a shock this large will release some existing
seismic energy; see: U.S. Congress, Office of Technology Assessment, Seismic
Verification_of_Nuclear_Testing_Treaties, P. 715, OTA-ISC-361 (Washington, DC:
U.S. Government Printing Office, May 1988). There wouldn't exactly be a crater,
but the mountain would definitely not be shaped like it used to be. The
pressure from the impact would be high enough to produce some unusual geologic
strutures. If you put a lump of coal under the meteor, the impact would be
enough to convert it to diamond (and, unfortunately, smash it to bits).
[13]French B. M. (1998) Traces_of_Catastrophe:_A_Handbook_of_Shock-Metamorphic
Effects_in_Terrestrial_Meteorite_Impact_Structures.,_Chapter_4, LPI
Contribution No. 954,Lunar and Planetary Institute, Houston. 120 pp
The good news is that, the last time a magnitude 7+ earthquake hit Denali, no
one was killed.[2]Alaska Earthquake Information Center, M_7.9_Denali_Fault
earthquake_of_November_3,_2002 Let's just hope nobody is on the mountain itself
when we do this.
[/imgs/a/57/mountain_hat.png]
Ok. Last one.
We'd need to lift the mountain out of the atmosphere, out past the orbit of the
GPS satellites, to the very outer limits of the Earth's gravity well. Then we
let go.
[/imgs/a/57/mountain_space.png]
It would hit Alaska at 10 kilometers per second.
The Last Frontier would not fare well. A 50-mile-wide crater would have
obliterated Denali National Park. Anchorage would be buried under three meters
of gravel.[14]Purdue University ImpactEarth_asteroid_impact_simulator The
shaking, combined with the debris falling into the ocean, would cause tsunamis
across the Pacific. Across North America, the ground would tremble. A wind
would sweep in from the northwest. The sky would darken.
In 1815, Mount Tambora erupted in the largest volcanic event in recorded
history. The resulting global veil of aerosols made 1816 the &quot;year without
a summer&quot;. Snow fell in Massachusetts in June, ice formed on rivers in
Pennsylvania in August, and frost killed most of the spring crops. The cooling
effects lingered for several years.
The Alaska impact would be far worse. Over the next few months, the skies
around the globe fill with dust. Summer is canceled and winter arrives. Global
temperatures would drop by 5 to 20 degrees Celsius and stay that way for a year
or more.[15]Covey, C, S Thompson, P Weissman, and M Maccracken. &quot;Global
Climatic Effects Of Atmospheric Dust From An Asteroid Or Comet Impact On
Earth.&quot; Global and Planetary Change 9, no. 3-4 (1994): 263-273.
On the plus side, we would not be engulfed in a global firestorm. When the
Chicxulub comet hit the Yucatan peninsula 65 million years ago, it blasted
molten debris into space. This debris fell back to Earth around the world,
heating the atmosphere and igniting global firestorms. These may have played a
role in the mass extinctions.[16]I don't have a citation for this. But, c'mon,
it's a 'global firestorm'. Can you really imagine that every species made it
through unscathed?
However, our mountain would carry only about 10% of the energy of the Chicxulub
impactor, which means that it wouldn't be capable of igniting global
firestorms.[17]Osinski, G. R., and E. Pierazzo. &quot;Environmental_Effects_of
Impact_Events.&quot;_In_Impact_Cratering_Processes_and_Products.. Chicester:
Wiley, 2012. 151. The firestorms would, in fact, only cover some of North
America. So that's a relief.
The northern hemisphere would be covered in ice, but our species would probably
manage to limp through. Civilization, on the other hand, might well collapse. A
total collapse of modern civilization would be a serious blow to the already
sluggish economy, and the economic damage could amount to $80 trillion per year
(the total value of all human goods and services). All in all, it would have
serious implications for the upcoming elections.
And that's that. We've dropped the mountain from as high as it can be dropped,
and I hope John-Clark is proud of the resulting devastation. Thanks for
reading, and---
[/imgs/a/57/mountain_hat.png]
No, that doesn't actually make sense. The Earth's gravitational pull doesn't---
[/imgs/a/57/mountain_hat.png]
Dropping it from higher up won't do anything; there won't be enough force
pulling it toward the---
[/imgs/a/57/mountain_hat.png]
Ok. Fine. You win. We'll try it.
[/imgs/a/57/mountain_higher.png]
Oops.

